[WIP] Improved event syscall API (#784)
filecoin-project/FIPs: FIPS/fip-XXXX.md

Moreover, the current gas charge is estimated based on the cost of emitting EVM events and won't be accurate for general events emitted by Wasm actors. Thus, we propose a new approach to calculating the gas cost, which should account for any type of emitted events.

Furthermore, this proposal allows validation to be performed concurrently during the deserialization of the input.

## Specification

Currently the [`emit_event`](https://docs.rs/fvm_sdk/latest/fvm_sdk/sys/event/fn.emit_event.html) syscall is defined as:

```rust
pub fn emit_event(
    event_off: *const u8,
    event_len: u32
) -> Result<()>;
```

The syscall takes in `event_off` and `event_len` which refer to a pointer and length in WASM memory where the CBOR encoded `ActorEvent` has been written. An `ActorEvent` structure is defined as:

```rust
pub struct ActorEvent {
    pub entries: Vec<Entry>,
}

pub struct Entry {
    pub flags: Flags,
    pub key: String,
    pub codec: u64,
    pub value: Vec<u8>,
}
```
### Proposed change
We propose changing the `emit_event` syscall shown above to the following:

```rust
pub fn emit_event(
    event_off: *const EventEntry,
    event_len: u32,
    key_off: *const u8,

>     key_len: u32,

Reviewer: (peer review)

1. Could we disambiguate the `key_len` here with `key_len` below? Same for `val_len`? Perhaps call these `*_size` or the ones below `*_cnt`?
2. Mind elaborating why the counts belong inside `EventEntry`, instead of as arguments in the syscall?

```rust
#[repr(C, packed)]
pub struct EventEntry {
    pub flags: u64,   // copy of Entry::flags
    pub codec: u64 ,  // copy Entry::codec
    pub key_len: u32, // Entry::key.len()
    pub val_len: u32, // Entry::value.len()
}
```

In the new `emit_event` syscall instead of taking the whole `ActorEvent` data encoded using CBOR this proposed version splits the `ActorEvent` instance into three different buffers that each refer to a pointer and length in WASM memory where their data has been written and are defined as follows:
- `event_off/event_len`: Pointer to an array of `EventEntry` where `event_len` is the number of elements in the array.
- `key_off/key_len`: Pointer to a buffer of size `key_len` bytes of all the keys from each entry are concatenated.
- `value_off/value_len`: Pointer to a buffer of size `value_len` bytes of all the values from each entry are concatenated.

### Serialization
The serialization from the syscall to FVM is implemented as follows:

> Given a `ActorEvent` with _N_ number of `Entry` elements, declare three buffer:

Reviewer: (Editorial review) Nits.

```suggestion
Given an `ActorEvent` with _N_ number of `Entry` elements, declare three buffers:
```

Deserialization in FVM is done in a similar fashion where we read each `EventEntry` from `entries` and create a new `Entry` object by using the flags/codec from `EventEntry` and reconstructing its keys/values by reading exactly `key_len`/`val_len` from `keys`/`values` respectively.

### Validation
In the FVM we perform the following validation while deserializing the input:

1. Initial validation:
    1. Validate that the size of `entries` is 255 or less. Previously 256 entries were accepted but reducing it by 1 ensures that the resulting CBOR encoding can store the length in a single byte.
    2. Validate that the size of `values` does not exceed 8KiB.
2. For each event entry `ee` in `entries`:
    1. Validate that the `ee.flags` bits are valid (see [FIP-0049#New chain types](https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/blob/6c2be9a09a7f03f16aa5f635e4beadeaa9c4fb3b/FIPS/fip-0049.md#new-chain-types) for more details).
    2. Validate that the `ee.key_len` is 31 bytes or less and is a valid UTF-8. Previously 32 byte sized keys were accepted but reducing it by 1 ensures compact CBOR encoding.
    3. Validate that the `ee.val_len` is 8Kib or less.

>     4. Validate that the `ee.codec` is acceptable. Currently, only `IPLD_RAW` (0x55) is allowed).

Reviewer: (Editorial review)

```suggestion
    4. Validate that the `ee.codec` is acceptable. Currently, only `IPLD_RAW` (0x55) is allowed.
```

>     4. Validate that the `ee.codec` is acceptable. Currently, only `IPLD_RAW` (0x55) is allowed).

Reviewer: (Peer review)

Decreasing the lengths to ensure compact CBOR encoding in all cases should have no impact since the EVM runtime produces events with max. 5 entries and and 5 total keys. However, we should specify that in the backwards compatibility section.

> ### Gas

Reviewer: (Peer review)

Could we call out how the gas fee is effectively reduced, as per what's stated in the abstract?

Author: There is a TODO below in the gas fee calculation but yes I agree we should confirm that the gas fee is reduced if we claim that in the FIP. Will add a new TODO to call that out explicitly

> This FIP makes an adjustment to the gas cost when emitting an event as originally defined in [FIP-0049#Gas costs](https://github.com/filecoin-project/FIPs/blob/6c2be9a09a7f03f16aa5f635e4beadeaa9c4fb3b/FIPS/fip-0049.md#gas-costs). Instead of having a separate gas fee for validation and processing of an event, we instead charge an upfront gas fee. This fee is applied after checking for read-only but before any other validation, allocation, or deserialization is performed as described in the specification above.

Reviewer 2: Could you specify this a bit more? The "upfront" gas fee is actually a single fee charged for both validation and processing, rather than two fees charged separately?

Notable changes from previous gas fee is that we:
- Removed the indexing cost associated with specifying flags that indicate that keys/values should be indexed by the client. This was not used and therefore removed here.
- We charge an additional memory allocation per event.
- Refactored the gas charges allowing us to tune gas for entry and key validation separately.

The proposed processing fee is:

```go
// cost for processing each entry
p_gas_per_entry_flat := 1750
p_gas_per_entry_per_byte := 25

// cost for UTF-8 decoding per byte, set to zero for now
//

> // TODO: This needs to be benchmarked and tuned before this FIP can proceed to Final status

Reviewer 3: It'd be nice if we had a separate "blockers" or "TODOs" section within the FIP template itself. We could put stuff like this there, that doesn't need to be done before we can start discussing the FIP seriously, but must be done before the FIP can actually land.

nr_entries = <number of entries>
key_len = <total size of keys in all entries>
value_len <total size of values in all entries>

// gas cost for validation of entries (including utf-8 parsing)
gas_validate_entries = p_gas_per_entry_flat + p_gas_per_entry_per_byte * nr_entries;
gas_validate_utf8 = p_gas_per_key_flat + p_gas_per_key_per_byte * key_len;

// estimated size (in bytes)
estimated_size = 12 + // event overhead
    9 * nr_entries + // entry overhead
    key_len +
    value_len

// calculate the gas for making a copy
copy_and_alloc = p_memcpy_gas_per_byte * estimated_size +
    p_block_alloc_cost_per_byte * estimated_size

// calculate the gas for hashing on AMT insertion
hash = p_hashing_cost_per_byte * estimated_size

processing_fee = copy_and_alloc +
    gas_validate_entries +
    gas_validate_utf8 +
    copy_and_alloc * 2 +
    hash
```

## Design Rationale

### Serialize a single buffer instead of using three
We considered serializing the `ActorEvent` using a single buffer (as with CBOR) for simplicity but decided against that since it required _some_ parsing if we wanted to charge gas for keys/values separately.

## Backwards Compatibility

> This FIP is consensus breaking, but should have no other impact on backwards compatibility.

Reviewer: (Peer review)

See comment above. I think this should explicitly reason about why EVM smart contracts are unaffected.

## Test Cases

Provided with implementation.

## Security Considerations

> TODO

Reviewer 2: Are you working to have this audited for security considerations, or are there no security considerations that you're reasonably aware of?

Reviewer 4: No audits are planned for this at the moment, we will probably go over this in future FVM audits, as we move further in our FVM Wasm timeline.
